Burkinabé cuisine
Burkinabé cuisine, the cuisine of Burkina Faso, is similar to the cuisines in many parts of West Africa, and is based on staple foods of sorghum, millet, rice, fonio, maize, peanuts, potatoes, beans, yams and okra. Rice, maize and millet are the most commonly-eaten grains. Grilled meat is common, particularly mutton, goat, beef and fish. Vegetables include, besides yams and potatoes, okra, tomatoes, zucchini, carrots, leeks, onions, beets, pumpkins, cucumbers, cabbage, sorrel and spinach.


Common dishes

Tô (Saghbo in Mooré), a bitter pulp made from crushed, cooked millet, sorghum or corn. The dough is mixed with a sauce made from vegetables such as tomatoes, peppers, sumbala and carrots. The resulting stew is sometimes supplemented by a piece of meat like mutton or goat.
French green beans
Fufu
Poulet Bicyclette, a grilled chicken dish common across West Africa.
Ragout d'Igname
Riz gras, rice cooked with onions, tomatoes and meat.
Riz Sauce
Sauce gombo, a sauce made with okra.
Brochettes
Restaurants generally serve Burkinabé dishes alongside those of neighbouring countries. Foreign dishes include a fish or meat stew called kédjénou from Côte d'Ivoire and poulet yassa, a chicken stew with lemon and onions from Senegal.


Common beverages
Bissap/Bisap, a sour-tasting drink made from Roselle (Bissap) flowers, and sweetened with sugar
Degue, a drink made from pearl millet and yogurt
Dôlo, a beer made from pearl millet or sorghum
Toédo, Baobab fruit
Yamaku, Ginger
Zoomkoom, a soft drink made from millet flour, ginger, lemon juice and tamarind


See also
Togolese cuisine
List of African cuisines


Notes
^ a b "Oxfam's Cool Planet - Food in Burkina Faso". Oxfam. Retrieved 2008-05-21. 
^ a b c Liza Debrevic. "Burkina Faso". In Ken Albala. Food Cultures of the World. ABC-CLIO. pp. 23–30. 
^ a b c d e Marchais, p. 99
^ Grubben, p.321
^ Steinkraus, p.273


References
Grubben, G. J. H. (2004). Vegetables: Vegetables (PROTA 2). PROTA. ISBN 90-5782-147-8. 
Marchais, Julien. Burkina Faso (in French). Petit Futé. ISBN 2-7469-1601-0. 
Steinkraus, Keith (2004). Industrialization of Indigenous Fermented Foods. CRC Press. p. 273. ISBN 0-8247-4784-4.