Caucasian cuisine
The cuisine of the Caucasus includes the traditional cuisines of Georgia, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Dagestan, Chechnya, Ingushetia, Kabardino-Balkaria, Karachay–Cherkessia, North Ossetia–Alania, South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Adjaria, and Adygea.


Traditional dishesEdit


Starters and snacksEdit
Sujuk
Basturma
Cheeses: Sulguni (Georgian), Circassian cheese
Chiburekki
Dolma or sarma - wine leaves, stuffed with rice or cheese


SoupsEdit
Bugleme - meat stew, served by the Mountain Jews
Dovga - yogurt (matsoni) soup cooked with a variety of herbs, rice and (optionally) chickpeas
Khash
Kharcho - Georgian soup containing beef, rice, cherry plum purée and chopped walnut
Piti or putuk
Sorpa - spicy meat soup with a large variety of recipes. Usually it is made with fried meat (lamb or beef), fried vegetables (potatoes, onions, carrots, optionally tomatoes and peppers), and herbs; may also include chickpeas or other beans, as well as noodles, and fruits (apples, plums)
Balyk sorpa - fish soup, served mostly on the coast of the Caspian Sea


Main coursesEdit
Chanakhi - spiced lamb stew with potatoes, tomatoes, aubergines and onions
Chakhokhbili - spiced chicken stew
Chiburekki
Chicken tabaka
Dolma or sarma - cabbage or wine leave rolls, aubergines, zucchinis, peppers, stuffed with rice or meat
Various kinds of flatbread pies such as khachapuri, chudu, khychiny, Ossetian pies. The flatbreads may be filled with meat, cheese, eggs, potatoes, pumpkin etc.
Küftə
Khinkali - dumplings that are either filled with meat, or quark
Lyula kebab
Manti- dumplings filled with meat
Plov
Shashlyk (Khorovats, Mtsvadi, Kebab)
Shashlyk Tarki-Tau or Gharsi khorovats - shashlyk with vegetables wrapped in lavash, similar to the Levantine shawarma and the Turkish doner kebab


Condiments and saucesEdit
Adjika - spicy but subtly flavoured relish based on a boiled preparation of hot red peppers, garlic, and typical Caucasian herbs and spices
Matzoon or matsoni - fermented milk product, similar to yogurt
Narsharab - pomegranate molasses
Satsivi - walnut sauce
Tkemali - sour plum sauce


BreadsEdit
Lavash
Matnakash
Tone Bread, shoti
Tsoureki


DessertsEdit
Halva
Pakhlava
Gata
Gozinaki
Churchkhela - sausage-shaped candies
Rahat lokum
Murabba


BeveragesEdit


AlcoholicEdit
Saperavi - acidic, teinturier-type grape Georgian wine
Rkatsiteli
Armenian brandy (e.g. Ararat)
Chacha - pomace brandy
Tutovka - mulberry brandy


Non-alcoholicEdit
Tea: black, nogay shai (salty tea)
Turkish coffee called Armenian coffee in Armenia
Suv - sherbet
Pomegranate juice
Mineral water, with Borjomi being the most praised one
Fermented milk beverages, such as ayran, tan (doogh), kefir


See alsoEdit
Middle Eastern cuisine
Soviet cuisine
Persian cuisine
Turkish cuisine
History of the Caucasus
Peoples of the Caucasus


ReferencesEdit
Beliaev, Edward; Oksana Buranbaeva (2005). Cultures of the World: Dagestan. Marshall Cavendish. ISBN 0-7614-2015-0. 
Sami Zubaida, Richard Tapper. A Taste of Thyme: Culinary Cultures of the Middle East (2nd ed.). London & New York: Tauris Parke Paperbacks. ISBN 1-86064-603-4.
Irina Petrosian, David Underwood. Armenian Food: Fact, Fiction & Folklore. Lulu.com, 2006. ISBN 1-4116-9865-7.
В. В. Похлебкин. Национальные кухни наших народов. Москва: Пищевая промышленность, 1980. ISBN 978-5-9524-2783-9 (William Pokhlyobkin, Ethnic Cuisines of our Peoples. Moscow: Soviet Food Industry publishing house, 1980; Russian)