Così (restaurant)
Così, based in Boston, Massachusetts, is a fast-casual restaurant chain that is known for its homemade flatbread. The name comes from the opera Così fan tutte, which was a favorite of the original owner.


Corporate historyEdit
The original Così restaurant was based on a small cafe in Paris, France. Cosi was founded in the United States in 1996, and there are currently over 100 locations in the continental United States, Costa Rica, and the United Arab Emirates. In October 1999, Così merged with the cafe/bar chain XandO (formerly ZuZu). Così's peak traffic was during the lunch hour, while XandO did heavy business in the evenings, allowing the two companies to complement each other's strengths. Cosi restaurants are open for breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
Cosi implemented a loyalty program in 2007.
In June 2010 Così sold its District of Columbia stores to Capitol C Restaurants who will run them under a franchise agreement. Capitol C is the owner of Qdoba Mexican Grill.
RJ Dourney was voted CEO in March 2014 by Cosi's board of directors.


FareEdit
Fare include sandwiches, soups, salads, flatbread pizzas, bowls, coffee, and handcrafted beverages. Cosi's menu features a variety of menu items that include unique variations, such as providing options to receive combination plates with half-orders of various items. The company has a signature item called Squagels, which is a square-shaped bagel. Cosi's bread is baked in an open flame oven in full view of customers. Their flatbread is based on a 2,000 year old recipe. Customers receive a sample of bread when they order.
All Così restaurants also feature a full-service espresso bar and some serve alcohol. They are also known for serving s'mores as a dessert..


ReferencesEdit


Further readingEdit
Chesto, Jon (March 18, 2015). "Moving to Boston is Così’s recipe for success". The Boston Globe. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 
Morgan, Richard (January 8, 2015). "Restaurant chain Cosi cooks up 28% jump in stock price". New York Post. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 
York, Emily Bryson (June 13, 2013). "Cosi looks to new leader, fewer stores". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 
MacArthur, Kate (February 26, 2011). "After one profitable quarter in eight years, can CEO of Così sandwich shops do it again?". Crain's Chicago Business. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 


External linksEdit
Official website