European cuisine
European cuisine, or alternatively Western cuisine, is a generalised term collectively referring to the cuisines of Europe and other Western countries, including (depending on the definition) that of Russia, as well as non-indigenous cuisines of Australasia, Latin America, North America, and Oceania, which derive substantial influence from European settlers in those regions. The term is used by East Asians to contrast with Asian styles of cooking. (This is analogous to Westerners' referring collectively to the cuisines of East Asian countries as Asian cuisine.) When used by Westerners, the term may sometimes refer more specifically to cuisine in Europe; in this context, a synonym is Continental cuisine, especially in British English.

The cuisines of Western countries are diverse by themselves, although there are common characteristics that distinguish Western cooking from cuisines of Asian countries and others. Compared with traditional cooking of Asian countries, for example, meat is more prominent and substantial in serving-size. Steak and cutlet in particular are common dishes across the West. Western cuisines also put substantial emphasis on grape wine and on sauces as condiments, seasonings, or accompaniments (in part due to the difficulty of seasonings penetrating the often larger pieces of meat used in Western cooking). Many dairy products are utilised in the cooking process, except in nouvelle cuisine. Wheat-flour bread has long been the most common source of starch in this cuisine, along with pasta, dumplings and pastries, although the potato has become a major starch plant in the diet of Europeans and their diaspora since the European colonisation of the Americas. Maize is much less common in most European diets than it is in the Americas; however corn meal (polenta or mămăligă), is a major part of the cuisine of Italy and the Balkans. Although flatbreads (especially with toppings such as pizza or tarte flambée), and rice are eaten in Europe, they do not constitute an ever-present staple. Salads (cold dishes with uncooked or cooked vegetables with sauce) are an integral part of European cuisine.
Formal European dinners are served in distinct courses. European presentation evolved from service à la française, or bringing multiple dishes to the table at once, into service à la russe, where dishes are presented sequentially. Usually, cold, hot and savoury, and sweet dishes are served strictly separately in this order, as hors d'oeuvre (appetizer) or soup, as entrée and main course, and as dessert. Dishes that are both sweet and savoury were common earlier in ancient Roman cuisine, but are today uncommon, with sweet dishes being served only as dessert. A service where the guests are free to take food by themselves is termed a buffet, and is usually restricted to parties or holidays. Nevertheless, guests are expected to follow the same pattern.
Historically, European cuisine has been developed in the European royal and noble courts. European nobility was usually arms-bearing and lived in separate manors in the countryside. The knife was the primary eating implement (cutlery), and eating steaks and other foods that require cutting followed. In contrast in the Sinosphere, the ruling class were the court officials, who had their food cut ready to eat in the kitchen, to be eaten with chopsticks. The knife was supplanted by the spoon for soups, while the fork was introduced later in the early modern period, ca. 16th century. Today, eating dinner by hand (without cutlery) is no longer considered acceptable.


Central European cuisines

 Austrian cuisine
 Czech cuisine
 German cuisine
 Hungarian cuisine
 Polish cuisine
 Liechtensteiner cuisine
 Slovak cuisine
 Slovenian cuisine
 Swiss cuisine


Eastern European cuisines

 Armenian cuisine
 Azerbaijani cuisine
 Belarusian cuisine
 Georgian cuisine
 Moldovan cuisine
 Russian cuisine
 Mordovian cuisine
 Tatar cuisine

 Ukrainian cuisine
 Crimean Tatar cuisine


Northern European cuisines
 British cuisine
 English cuisine
 Scottish cuisine
 Welsh cuisine

 Danish cuisine
 Estonian cuisine
 Faroese cuisine
 Finnish cuisine
 Icelandic cuisine
 Irish cuisine
 Latvian cuisine
 Lithuanian cuisine
 Norwegian cuisine
 Swedish cuisine
 Sami cuisine


Southern European cuisines

 Albanian cuisine
 Bosnia and Herzegovina cuisine
 Bulgarian cuisine
 Croatian cuisine
 Cypriot cuisine
 Greek cuisine
 Macedonian Greek cuisine

 Italian cuisine
 Neapolitan cuisine
 Sardinian cuisine
 Sicilian cuisine
 Tuscan cuisine
 Venetian cuisine

 Occitan cuisine
 Macedonian cuisine
 Maltese cuisine
 Montenegrin cuisine
 Portuguese cuisine
 Romanian cuisine
 Serbian cuisine
 Slovenian cuisine
 Spanish cuisine
 Andalusian cuisine
 Asturian cuisine
 Aragonese cuisine
 Balearic cuisine
 Basque cuisine
 Canarian cuisine
 Cantabrian cuisine
 Castilian-Manchego cuisine
 Castilian-Leonese cuisine
 Catalan cuisine
 Extremaduran cuisine
 Galician cuisine
 Valencian cuisine

 Turkish cuisine
 Northern Cypriot cuisine


Western European cuisines
 Belgian cuisine
 Dutch cuisine
 French cuisine
Haute cuisine
Cuisine classique
Nouvelle cuisine

 Luxembourgian cuisine


See also

Early modern European cuisine
Latin American cuisine
Medieval cuisine
Mediterranean cuisine
Romani cuisine
Jewish cuisine


References


Further reading
Albala, Ken (2003). Food in Early Modern Europe. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0313319626. Retrieved November 2012. 
R & R Publishing; (et al.) (2005). European Cuisine: The Best in European Food. Cpg Incorporated. ISBN 1740225279. Retrieved November 2012.