Food science
Food science is the applied science devoted to the study of food. The Institute of Food Technologists defines food science as "the discipline in which the engineering, biological, and physical sciences are used to study the nature of foods, the causes of deterioration, the principles underlying food processing, and the improvement of foods for the consuming public". The textbook Food Science defines food science in simpler terms as "the application of basic sciences and engineering to study the physical, chemical, and biochemical nature of foods and the principles of food processing".


Overview
Activities of food scientists include the development of new food products, design of processes to produce these foods, choice of packaging materials, shelf-life studies, sensory evaluation of products using panels or potential consumers, as well as microbiological and chemical testing. Food scientists may study more fundamental phenomena that are directly linked to the production of food products and its properties.
Food science brings together multiple scientific disciplines. It incorporates concepts from fields such as microbiology, chemical engineering, and biochemistry.
Professional associations of food scientists include:
Institute of Food Technologists (IFT)
The International Union of Food Science and Technology (IUFoST)
Food Scientists and Nutritionists Association India (fsna India)
South African Association for Food Science and Technology (SAAFoST)


Disciplines
Some of the subdisciplines of food science are described below.


Food chemistry

Food chemistry is the study of chemical processes and interactions of all biological and non-biological components of foods. The biological substances include such items as meat, poultry, lettuce, beer, and milk as examples. It is similar to biochemistry in its main components such as carbohydrates, lipids, and protein, but it also includes areas such as water, vitamins, minerals, enzymes, food additives, flavors, and colors. This discipline also encompasses how products change under certain food processing techniques and ways either to enhance or to prevent them from happening.


Food physical chemistry

Food physical chemistry is the study of both physical and chemical interactions in foods in terms of physical and chemical principles applied to food systems, as well as the application of physicochemical techniques and instrumentation for the study and analysis of foods.


Food engineering

Food engineering is the industrial processes used to manufacture food.


Food microbiology

Food microbiology is the study of the microorganisms that inhabit, create, or contaminate food, including the study of microorganisms causing food spoilage. "Good" bacteria, however, such as probiotics, are becoming increasingly important in food science. In addition, microorganisms are essential for the production of foods such as cheese, yogurt, bread, beer, wine and, other fermented foods.


Food packaging

Food packaging is packaging of food to preserve food after it has been processed and contain it through distribution. Its main objective is to provide physical and barrier protection for food. In most cases food packaging contains labels bearing nutritional and other information about the specific food. Food packaging is mostly done by using packaging machines.


Food preservation

Food preservation involves the causes and prevention of quality degradation.


Food substitution
Food substitution refers to the replacement of ingredients in a food product, especially for cost reduction. Food substitution is also used to reduce fat, sugar, or calories from a product while maintaining similar shape, texture, color, or taste.


Food technology

Food technology is the technological aspects. Early scientific research into food technology concentrated on food preservation. Nicolas Appert’s development in 1810 of the canning process was a decisive event. The process wasn’t called canning then and Appert did not really know the principle on which his process worked, but canning has had a major impact on food preservation techniques.


Molecular gastronomy

Molecular gastronomy is the scientific investigation of processes in cooking, social and artistic gastronomical phenomena.


New product development

New product development includes the invention of new food products.


Quality control

Quality control involves the causes, prevention and communication dealing with food-borne illness.


Sensory analysis

Sensory analysis is the study of how consumers' senses perceive food.


By country


Australia

The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) is the federal government agency for scientific research in Australia. CSIRO maintains more than 50 sites across Australia and biological control research stations in France and Mexico. It has nearly 6,500 employees.


South Korea
The Korean Society of Food Science and Technology, or KoSFoST, claims to be the first society in South Korea for food science.
] programs at land-grant universities (which were state-run and largely under state mandates to allow for sex-blind admission), but then graduated and had difficulty finding jobs due to widespread sexism in the chemistry industry in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Finding conventional career paths blocked, they found alternative employment as instructors in home economics departments and used that as a base to launch the foundation of many modern food science programs.
The main US organization regarding food science and food technology is the Institute of Food Technologists (IFT), headquartered in Chicago, Illinois, which is the US member organisation of the International Union of Food Science and Technology (IUFoST).


Publications
Notable food science journals include:
Journal of Food Science
Food Quality and Preference
Food Chemistry
Journal of Dairy Science
Food and Bioprocess Technology
LWT- Food Science and Technology
Popular books on some aspects of food science or kitchen science have been written by Harold McGee and Howard Hillman, among others.


See also


Notes and references


Further reading
Wanucha, Genevieve (February 24, 2009). "Two Happy Clams: The Friendship that Forged Food Science". MIT Technology Review.


External links
Food science at DMOZ