Macedonian cuisine
Macedonian cuisine, an aspect of Balkan cuisine, is the traditional cuisine of the Macedonia. It reflects Mediterranean and Middle Eastern influences, and to a lesser extent Italian, German and Eastern European (especially Hungarian) ones. The relatively warm climate in Macedonia provides excellent growth conditions for a variety of vegetables, herbs and fruits. Macedonian cuisine is also noted for the diversity and quality of its dairy products, wines, and local alcoholic beverages, such as rakija.
Among meats, beef, mutton and chicken are the most common ones. Pork is rarely used (not just by the Muslim minority, but by the Christian majority as well).
Tavče-gravče and mastika are considered the national dish and drink of Macedonia, respectively.


Foods

Tavče-Gravče
Turli Tava
Ajvar, roasted red pepper spread. Can be mild or hot.
Kebapi
Polneti Piperki (stuffed capsicum (usually filled with rice or rice with meat)
Pita (pastry)
Burek
Malidzano, an eggplant spread
Musaka
Pindzur, a spicy vegetable relish
Popara
Pastrmajlija

Sharplaninski ovchi Kashkaval (hard sheep's milk cheese from the Šar Mountains – Šar Planina in Macedonian)
Shirden and Kukurek
Sarma
Kisela Zelka and Rasolnica (Sour cabbage)
Mekici (also known as tiganici or pishii), fried lumps of dough
Chorba od Kopriva (Creamy Nettle Soup)
Kompir Mandza (a potato and meat stew)
Pleskavica or burger (also Sharska and Ajducka )
Kachamak (aka. Bakadarnik)
Zelnik
Selsko meso is roast beef, pork and lamb with mushrooms, white wine and yellow cheese on top, mostly made in clay pottery
Tarator


Desserts

Kadaif
Med
Tulumba
Palačinki (Crêpe)
Kompot
Lokum
Baklava


Drinks


Coffee

Macedonia has a well-developed coffee culture, and Turkish coffee is by far the most popular coffee beverage. With over 5,000 establishments, the traditional Macedonian coffeehouse and bar—the kafeana—is one of the most common places to go out and have a drink. However, because of the negative stereotypes surrounding the kafana, many younger people prefer to frequent the more Western-styled cafés which are also seen as being classier.
From the days of the Ottoman Empire through to the present, coffee has played an important role in Macedonian lifestyle and culture. The serving and consumption of coffee has had a profound effect on betrothal and gender customs, political and social interaction, prayer, and hospitality customs. Although many of the rituals are not prevalent in today's society, coffee has remained an integral part of Macedonian culture.
Other coffee beverages such as lattes, cafe mochas and cappuccinos are becoming increasingly popular with the opening of more upmarket cafés. Professionals and businesspeople have contributed to the popularity instant coffee (especially frappé).


Alcohol

Wine
Vranec
Traminec
Alexandria
Smederevka

Traditionally, white wine would be consumed in the summer, and red wine, in winter.
Mastika
Rakija
Beer
Skopsko
Krali Marko
Zlaten Dab
Gorsko
Bitolsko
Kenbach

Boza, a drink made from millet, traditionally sold by ethnic Albanian vendors.
Salep
Yoghurt (Kefir)
Mineral water
Gorska Voda
Pelisterka
Pella rosa
Ilina
Kozufcanka


See also
European cuisine
Cuisine of the Mediterranean
Eastern European cuisine


References


External links
Macedonian food, cuisine and recipes blog
Macedonian Cuisine, cuisine and recipes portal
Macedonian Cuisine, food recipes