Mughlai cuisine
Mughlai cuisine refers to a cuisine, consisting of dishes developed in Medieval India by the people of the Mughal Empire. It represents the cooking styles used in North India (especially Uttar Pradesh and Delhi), Pakistan (particularly among Muhajir people), and the Indian city of Hyderabad. The cuisine is strongly influenced by Central Asian cuisine, the region where the Turco-Mongol Mughal rulers originally hailed from, and it has in turn strongly influenced the regional cuisines of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
The tastes of Mughlai cuisine vary from extremely mild to spicy, and are often associated with a distinctive aroma and the taste of ground and whole spices. A Mughlai course is an elaborate buffet of main course dishes with a variety of accompaniments. Mughlai cuisine also gave rise to the Awadhi cuisine of Lucknow


DishesEdit

The native tongue of the Mughals were Chagatay Turkic languages and the official adopted language of the Mughal Empire was Persian, so many Mughlai Indian dishes were named in the Turkic and Persian languages. Dishes include various Kebabs, Kofta (meatballs), Nihari, Pulao (a.k.a. Pilaf in Central Asia), and Biryani. Paneer is used for preparing vegetarian dishes to suit vegetarian dietary requirements.
Other dishes include:
Nihari
Paya
Kachri Qeema
Haleem (Khichda)
Mughlai Chicken[1]
Biryani
Mughlai Paratha
Qeema Matar
Meat Durbari
Mughlai Chicken Pulao
Murg Kababs Mughlai
Murg Noorjehani
Murg Kali Mirch
Murgh Musallam
Kofta Shorba
Nargisi Kofta
Murg Tandoor
Murg Chaap
Murg Masala
Malai Kofta
Navratan Korma
Reshmi Kabab
Boti Kabab
Shahjehani Murg Masala
Shahi Chicken Korma
Shahi Kaju Aloo
Shahi Rogan Josh
Pasanda
Rezala


DessertsEdit

Shahi Tukra is a rich bread pudding with dry fruits, flavoured with cardamom.
Barfi
Kalakand
Kulfi
Sheer korma
Falooda
Anjeer Halwa (Figs sweet dish)
Kesari Firni is a rice based sweet dish streaked with Saffron
Kheer


ReferencesEdit


Further readingEdit
Mughlai Cook Book, Diamond Pocket Books, ISBN 81-7182-547-8 [2]
Nita Mehta's Vegetarian Mughlai Khaana By Nita Mehta, Published 1999 ISBN 81-86004-10-6
Mughlai By Amrita Patel Published 2004, Sterling Publishers, 160 pages ISBN 81-207-2646-4


External linksEdit
Mughlai Recipes
Mughal Emperors' Food