Oporto (restaurant)
Oporto is an international Australian-based Quick Service Restaurant fast-food franchise with a Portuguese-theme. Oporto specialises in Portuguese style chicken.


International
Oporto has more than 100 'eat in' or 'take-away' restaurants in Australia, New Zealand, the United States, and the United Kingdom, although a large majority of these are located in New South Wales, Australia, where the company is headquartered. It previously also operated stores throughout China. Oporto are in New Zealand and India.


History
The first Oporto restaurant was founded in 1986 by António Cerqueira, an Australian of Portuguese descent, in North Bondi, New South Wales, Australia but was originally named Portuguese Style Bondi Charcoal Chicken. The 'Oporto' name came from Porto, Portugal's second largest city.
Oporto first opened a franchise store in 1995 and was named the fastest growing franchise in Australia in January 2005 by Business Review Weekly.
In 2007 there were 100 locations in New South Wales, 14 in Queensland, 8 in Victoria, 5 in ACT, 5 in South Australia and 6 in New Zealand. Some of these restaurants are called Oporto Express and offer a smaller range of products – most commonly this means they do not offer a breakfast menu.
Oporto opened their first store in the United Kingdom at London's Victoria Station in January 2009, and opened their first restaurant in the United States in Rancho Cucamonga, California on 25 February 2011. There are now over 100 stores in operation in the world (currently in Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States). Oporto has three types of Oporto store types; Drive Thru, Shopping Centre and Strip stores.
In July 2007, Quadrant Private Equity and Quick Service Restaurant Holdings (which owns Red Rooster and Chicken Treat) purchased Oporto.
In June 2011, Archer Capital acquired Quick Service Restaurant Holdings from Quadrant Private Equity for an estimated $450 million (including Red Rooster and Chicken Treat). 
On 26 March 2012 Oporto ceased trading in China, closing its three outlets.
In 2013, Oporto opened their first restaurant in Western Australia at South Perth.


Food
Oporto’s chilli sauce is a Portuguese piri-piri sauce made from chilli, ginger, lemon and garlic. Oporto has a range of fast food items centering around its grilled chicken.


Identity & marketing
Oporto describes itself as a wholly owned Australian company.
The franchise distances itself from the perception that fast food is unhealthy by promoting its chicken as "fresh not frozen, grilled not fried".


See also
Nando's – A Portuguese-style chicken restaurant of South African origin
List of fast-food chicken restaurants
List of restaurant chains in Australia


References


External links
Oporto – Official Site