President's Council on Fitness, Sports, and Nutrition
The President's Council on Fitness, Sports and Nutrition (PCFSN), is an American government organization that aims to "promote, encourage and motivate Americans of all ages to become physically active and participate in sport." It is part of the Office of Public Health and Science, an agency of the United States Department of Health and Human Services. Prior to June 2010, it was called the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports.


History
The President's Council on Youth Fitness was founded on July 16, 1955, to encourage American children to be healthy and active, after a study indicating that American youths were less physically fit than European children, by then-President Dwight D. Eisenhower.
In 1963, President Kennedy changed the council's name to President's Council on Physical Fitness to reflect its role to serve all Americans.
In 1966, President Lyndon B. Johnson created the Presidential Physical Fitness Award, the name of which was later changed to President's Challenge Youth Physical Fitness Awards Program.
In 1968, the council's name was changed to President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports to emphasize the importance of sports in life.
In 1972, the Presidential Sports Award Program was created.
In 1983, the United States Congress declared May as "National Physical Fitness and Sports Month".
In 1996, the Surgeon General's Report on Physical Activity and Health was released. In 1997, the Council released its report on Physical Activity and Sport in the Lives of Boys.
In June 2010, President Barack Obama renamed the agency the President's Council on Fitness, Sports and Nutrition, with a new emphasis on nutrition as an element of fitness. First Lady Michelle Obama announced the new commission's goal "to end the epidemic of childhood obesity in a generation" and also announced that the president had named, as the new co-chairs of the council, New Orleans Saints quarterback Drew Brees and former Olympic gymnast Dominique Dawes.
On January 11, 2012, operators of the Web site for participants of the Challenge and Active Lifestyle programs learned that the site had been hacked, resulting in the release of personal information of the participants. The President's Challenge site displayed a notice that it was down for "Site Maintenance – We're taking a little breather." On January 20, 2012, the site was modified to explain the hacking.On January 27, 2012, The President's Challenge sent out emails to its participants saying that the Web site was functional as of January 24, 2012, and asked participants to reset their user passwords.


Awards
The Council publishes guidelines for awards that are given out. They are the Presidential Physical Fitness Award, the National Physical Fitness Award, and the Participant Physical Fitness Award. However, it has been announced that the Physical Fitness Test on which these awards are based will no longer be available after the 2012–2013 school year. Additionally, there is the Active Lifestyle Award for staying active and the Presidential Champions Award for raising one's amount of activity.


Standardized tests
The award was given to students who achieved the top fifteenth percentile cumulative scores across these events:
50 yard dash
600 yard dash
Standing broad jump
Pull ups
Sit ups
Softball throw


See also
The President's Challenge


References
^ Executive Order – President's Council on Fitness, Sports, and Nutrition, White House press release, June 23, 2010.
^ "Michelle Obama jumps rope, emphasizes nutrition", USA Today, June 24, 2010.
^ "First Lady Launches President’s Council on Fitness, Sports and Nutrition", White House press release, June 23, 2010.
^ Tau, Bryon (January 19, 2012). "Let's Move-affiliated website hacked". Politico. Politico.com. Retrieved January 19, 2012. 
^ "Site Maintenance". The President's Council on Fitness, Sports & Nutrition. Retrieved January 19, 2012. 
^ "We apologize for the site maintenance. We will be back up soon.". The President's Council on Fitness, Sports & Nutrition. Retrieved January 20, 2012. 
^ Important Security Information
^ The President's Challenge Facebook page
^ Physical Fitness Awards
^ Active Lifestyle Award
^ Presidential Champions Aware
^ http://www.fitness.gov/pdfs/50-year-anniversary-booklet.pdf


External links
President's Council on Fitness, Sports & Nutrition official website