Restaurant management
Restaurant management is the profession of managing a restaurant. Associate, bachelor, and graduate degree programs are offered in restaurant management by community colleges, junior colleges, and some universities in the United States.


ResponsibilitiesEdit


AdministrationEdit
The Owner (or proprietor) is the person responsible for the business in general.
The General Manager or Operations Manager (may also be called the Managing Partner if he owns a stake in the business) is the person who operates the restaurant for the owner.
The Assistant Manager or Administrative Assistant (if there) manages the office and business aspect of the restaurant, is responsible for Human Resources (including payroll), financial and taxation documentation, and all record management.
The Host (or greeter) also awaits in the front.


Front-of-the-House managementEdit
The Maître d'hôtel (or Manager) is entirely responsible for all front-of-the-house operations, manages staff who give services to customers and allocate the duties of opening and closing the restaurant. He or she is responsible for making sure his or her staff is following the service standards and health and safety regulations. He or she is the most important person in the front-of-the-house environment, since it is up to him or her to motivate the staff and give them job satisfaction. He or she looks after and guides the personal well-being of the staff, since it makes the work force stronger and more profitable, and works with other executive management officers such as the Executive Chef and the Owner.
The Beverage Manager (or Bar Manager, Bartender) is responsible for all the beverage, beverage service and bar operations of the restaurant. He or she reports directly to the Maître d'hôtel (Manager). Beverage managers order bar inventory, maintain and track inventory, issue bar stock, and schedule bar service personnel. Often a bar manager will have prior experience as a bartender. Often, a beverage manager will have extensive knowledge of beverages that include wine, beer, and spirits.


Back-of-the-House ManagementEdit
The Executive Chef usually operates in corporate restaurant companies. They are entirely responsible for all back-of-the-house operations, and works with other executive management officers such as the Maitre d'Hôtel and the Owner.
The Chef de Cuisine (or Executive Sous Chef) manages the kitchen staff working in the kitchen and creates the menus in absence of the Executive Chef.
The kitchen is often referred to as the heart of the restaurant . They create the menu and "specials" as well as order the products needed for the menu recipes. Managing the kitchen staff helps to control food timing, quality, and cost. Kitchen management involves, most importantly, cost control and budgeting.
The Sous Chef (or Kitchen Manager) oversees the daily kitchen operations. They also act as the Chef de Cuisine when that individual is not in the restaurant.
The Head Cook is the Head Preparation Chef who supervises food preparation (prep).
The Head Station Chef (or Head/Lead Line Chef/Cook) supervises the cooking or "work" of your menu order and the "push" to ensure your entire table will receive their order at the same time.


ReferencesEdit


Further readingEdit
Dahl, Joseph Oliver (1944). Restaurant Management, Principles and Practice (4th ed.). New York; London: Harper & brothers. OCLC 1741738. 
Ninemeier, Jack D.; Hayes, David K. (2006). Restaurant Operations Management: Principles and Practices. Upper Saddle River, N.J: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-110090-4. 
Foxwell, Amy (2011). How to Market a Restaurant, Your Complete Guide to Easy, Affordable and Effective Restaurant Marketing. US; ISBN 1480289094. 
Foxwell, Amy (2011). Restaurant Marketing System. US. 


External linksEdit
American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute Restaurant Manager Certification
Restaurant Operation and Management Articles
Restaurant Management
Restaurant Marketing