Scolari's Food and Drug
Scolari's Food and Drug is an independently owned supermarket chain based in Sparks, Nevada. The company currently operates four stores in the Central Coast region of California and twelve stores in the Northern portion of Nevada.
The company also operates two stores in Reno and one store in Carson City under the Sak N Save brand. The company also franchises one Save-A-Lot Store in Las Vegas, Nevada.


HistoryEdit
Founded in the Central Coast region of California in 1947 by Joe Scolari (now run by sons Joey & Jerry Scolari). In 1982 it purchased the Warehouse Markets chain of Reno, Nevada; they have since moved their base of operations to Nevada, where the bulk of their stores are located. In 1991 they changed their corporate name to Scolari's Food and Drug to reflect their expanding role.
In 2010, Scolari's announced the closure of its longtime distribution facility in Sparks, NV. Scolari's subsequently announced a supply agreement with C&S Wholesale Grocers.
In August 2010, Scolari's closed the Sak N Save Store in Carson City, NV less than 2 years after converting the store, previously a Scolari's Store, to the Sak N Save banner.
In March 2011, Scolari's announced the closure of the pharmacy inside its Reno location on Lemmon Drive.
In May 2011, Scolari's discontinued the Club Card program, making sale prices accessible to all customers. As customer spending was no longer tracked via the club card, Scolari's also ceased its Friendship Fund, a program that gave 1% of total purchases to a non-profit organization of the participating customer's choice.
In April 2012, Scolari's announced the closure of its California locations citing the economy as well as logistical challenges.
In July 2014 Scolari's closed their store in Sparks at Disc Drive and plan to close their store in south Reno at South Virginia in October 2014


NevadaEdit
Reno, five stores.
Sparks, one store.
Sun Valley
Tonopah
Yerington


External linksEdit
Scolari's Food and Drug (Scolari's official home page)